The cat was seen as a sacred animial in ancient Eqypt, and the history of domestic cats dates back to as early as 8000 years.
The biggest breed of domesticated cats are called a Maine Coon cat and weighs up to 11 kg.
Cats are some of the smartest animals and can interpret a human's mood and feelings.
The average cat sleeps between 12-14 hours a day.
Cats paw (repeatedly treading on a spot - often it's owner) to mark their territory. Cats sweat through the bottom of their paws and rub this off as a marking mechanism.
Cats can be taught how to use the toilet.
White cats with blue eyes are quite often born deaf.
Cat urine glows in the dark if a black light is shined on it. This is a good way to detect cat urine in your home.
Cats have 220° field of view where humans only have 180°.
Cats' sense of smell is 14 times stronger than that of humans.
Cats have 30 permanent teeth, while adult humans have 32.
Cats have 30 vertebrae, while humans only have 25.
Cats have 230 bones in their bodies, this is 24 more than humans.
Cats have a body temperature of between 101 and 102.2 °F (38 and 39 °C).
The lifespan of cats are usually between 15 and 20 years.
Cats have a heart rate of between 120 - 240 beats per minute. (This varies highly between different breeds cats)
Cats take between 20 - 40 breaths per minute in an inactive state. (This varies highly between different breeds cats)
The print on a cat's nose is like that of a fingerprint of a human, each is unique.
Cats have a top speed of about 30 mp/h (48.28 km/h).
Cats cannot be vegetarians, because they need nutrients from meat.
Most dog foods don't have the correct amount of nutrients needed for a cat.
Cats spend 8 to 50 percent of their day grooming themselves.
Cats' whiskers are actually touch sensitive hairs, which serve a major sensory function in tactile perception (sense of touch).
Wet cat food is highly recommended by scientists, because of the water intake.
Cats' ears can hear up to 2 octaves higher than our ears, or 60 to 80 Kilohertz.
Cats move their tail as a communication sequence.
Cats have a righting gland in their bodies which makes them able to spin in the air, almost always landing on their feet.
Cats usually like to eat small servings multiple times a day.
Cats need 3 or 4 times the nutritional serving than humans do.
As cats age, their sense of smell and taste start to fade.
Although it is stereotyped that cats love milk, it has a high chance of giving them severe diahrrea.
Cats cannot see in complete and total darkness, but have nocturnal eyes. This is one of the reasons cats eyes shine in the dark.
Cats have a higher threshold for heat than we do, at 52 degrees celcius.
Cats' eyes and noses are sensitive to the smell of citrus, making their eyes water and nose run.
Cats purr when they are in pain as well as happy.
Cats only sweat through their paws.
The word "Ailurophilia" (AYL-oo-ro-PHIL-ee-ah)means "To have a love of cats".
Cats are descendants of desert animals, so they are not driven to drink water.
Cats cannot taste sweetness whatsoever.
Cats have 52 vertabrae, twice as much as the amount of vertabrae in our bodies.
The third eyelid, also known as the nictitating membrane or haw, slides over the eye when a cat is sick.
Cats use their sense of smell, hearing, and sight all at once for hunting.
The nose pad of a cat is ridged in a pattern that is unique, just like the fingerprint of a human.
A cat's heart beats twice as fast as a human heart, at 110 to 140 beats per minute.
Cats knead with their paws when they're happy.
The domestic cat is the only cat species able to hold its tail vertically while walking. All wild cats hold their tails horizontally or tucked between their legs while walking.
During her productive life, one female cat could have more than 100 kittens.
Cats have 290 bones in their bodies, and 517 muscles.
There are three body types for a cat. Cobby type is a compact body, deep chest, short legs and broad head. The eyes are large and round. Muscular type is a sturdy body and round, full-cheeked head. Foreign type is a slender body, with long legs and a long tail. The head is wedge-shaped, with tall ears and slanting eyes.
Know how old your cat really is? If your cat is 3, your cat is 21 in human years. If your cat is 8, your cat is 40 in human years. If your cat is 14, your cat is 70 in human years.
The average age for an indoor cat is 15 years, while the average age for an outdoor cat is only 3 to 5 years.
A cat's normal body temperature is 101.5 degrees F (38.6 C). This is slightly warmer than a humans.
There are two species of wild cats in African and Europe that still hunt. These two species both resemble the domestic tabbies.
Cats are partially color blind. They have the equivalency of human red/green color blindness. (Reds appear green and greens appear red; or shades thereof.)
Cats don't see "detail" very well. To them, their person may appear hazy when standing in front of them.
Cats need 1/6th the amount of light that humans do to see. Their night vision is amazing!
The color of a kitten's eyes will change as it grows older.
At birth, kittens can't see or hear. Cats open their eyes after five to fifteen days and begin to develop their eyesight and hearing at approximately 2 weeks. They begin to walk at 20 days.
Kittens begin dreaming at just over one week old.
A cat's ear pivots 180 degrees. They have 30 muscles in each ear, and use twelve or more muscles to control their ear movement.
Cats are the sleepiest of all mammals. They spend 16 hours of each day sleeping. With that in mind, a seven year old cat has only been awake for two years of its life!
Cats are more active during the evening hours.
Cats spend 30% of their waking hours grooming themselves.
An adult cat has 32 teeth.
In 1987 cats overtook dogs as the number one pet in America.
Cats that live together sometimes rub each others heads to show that they have no intention of fighting. Young cats do this more often, especially when they are excited.
A cat that bites you for rubbing his stomach is often biting from pleasure, not anger.
The more cats are spoken to, the more they will speak back. You will learn a lot from your cat's wide vocabulary of chirps and meows.
Cats often overract to unexpected stimuli because of their extremely sensitive nervous system.
Kittens who are taken along on short, trouble-free car trips to town tend to make good passengers when they get older. They get used to the sounds and motions of traveling and make less connection between the car and the visits to the vet.
Kittens lose their baby teeth!! At three to four months the incisors erupt. Then at four to six months, they lose their canines, premolars and molars. By the time they are seven months old, their adult teeth are fully developed. This is one of the ways a vet (or you) can tell the age of a kitten.
The word cat refers to a family of meat-eating animals that include tigers, lions, leopards, and panthers.
Cats have five toes on each front paw, but only four toes on each back paw.
Cats are sometimes born with extra toes. This is called polydactly. These toes will not harm the cat, but you should keep his claws trimmed just like any toe.
Cats have true fur, in that they have both an undercoat and an outer coat.
Newborn kittens have closed ear canals that don't begin to open for nine days.When the eyes open, they are always blue at first. They change color over a period of months to the final eye color.
Most cats have no eyelashes.
Cats have a full inner-eyelid, or nictitating membrane. This inner-eyelid serves to help protect the eyes from dryness and damage. When the cat is ill, the inner-eyelid will frequently close partially, making it visible to the observer.
A cat cannot see directly under its nose. This is why the cat cannot seem to find tidbits on the floor.
You can tell a cat's mood by looking into its eyes. A frightened or excited cat will have large, round pupils. An angry cat will have narrow pupils. The pupil size is related as much to the cat's emotions as to the degree of light.
It is a common belief that cats are color blind. However, recent studies have shown that cats can see blue, green and red.
A large majority of white cats with blue eyes are deaf. White cats with only one blue eye are deaf only in the ear closest to the blue eye. White cats with orange eyes do not have this disability.
Cats with white fur and skin on their ears are very prone to sunburn. Frequent sunburns can lead to skin cancer. Many white cats need surgery to remove all or part of a cancerous ear. Preventive measures include sunscreen, or better, keeping the cat indoors.
A cat can jump even seven times as high as it is tall.
The cat's footpads absorb the shocks of the landing when the cat jumps.
Cats lack a true collarbone. Because of this lack, cats can generally squeeze their bodies through any space they can get their heads through. You may have seen a cat testing the size of an opening by careful measurement with the head.
If left to her own devices, a female cat may have three to seven kittens every four months. This is why population control using neutering and spaying is so important.
A cat is pregnant for about 58-65 days.
Mother cats teach their kittens to use the litter box.
The way you treat kittens in the early stages of it's life will render it's personality traits later in life.
Contrary to popular belief, the cat is a social animal. A pet cat will respond and answer to speech , and seems to enjoy human companionship.
When well treated, a cat can live twenty or more years but the average life span of a domestic cat is 14 years.
Neutering a cat extends its life span by two or three years.
Cats, especially older cats, do get cancer. Many times this disease can be treated successfully.
Cats can't taste sweets.
Cats must have fat in their diet because they can't produce it on their own.
Some common houseplants poisonous to cats include: English Ivy, iris, mistletoe, philodendron, and yew.
Tylenol and chocolate are both poisionous to cats.
Many cats cannot properly digest cow's milk. Milk and milk products give them diarrhea.
The average cat food meal is the equivalent to about five mice.
Cats can get tapeworms from eating fleas. These worms live inside the cat forever, or until they are removed with medication. They reproduce by shedding a link from the end of their long bodies. This link crawls out the cat's anus, and sheds hundreds of eggs. These eggs are injested by flea larvae, and the cycles continues. Humans may get these tapeworms too, but only if they eat infected fleas. Cats with tapeworms should be dewormed by a veterinarian.
Cats can get tapeworms from eating mice. If your cat catches a mouse it is best to take the prize away from it.
Though rare, cats can contract canine heart worms.
The gene in cats that causes the orange coat color is sexed linked, and is on the X sex chromosome. This gene may display orange or black. Thus, as female cat with two X chromosomes may have orange and black colors in its coat. A male, with only one X chromosome, can have only orange or black, not both.
If a male cat is both orange and black it is ( besides being extremely rare ) sterile. To have both the orange and the black coat colors, the male cat must have all or part of both female X chromosomes. This unusual sex chromosome combination will render the male cat sterile.
Cats have AB blood groups just like people.
A form of AIDS exists in cats.
The color of the points in Siamese cats is heat related. Cool areas are darker.
Siamese kittens are born white because of the heat inside the mother's uterus before birth. This heat keeps the kittens' hair from darkening on the points.
People who are allergic to cats are actually allergic to cat saliva or to cat dander. If the resident cat is bathed regularly the allergic people tolerate it better.
Studies now show that the allergen in cats is related to their scent glands. Cats have scent glands on their faces and at the base of their tails. Entire male cats generate the most scent. If this secretion from the scent glands is the allergen, allergic people should tolerate spayed female cats the best.
Cats do not think that they are little people. They think that we are big cats. This influences their behavior in many ways.
Cats are subject to gum disease and to dental caries. They should have their teeth cleaned by the vet or the cat dentist once a year.
Many people fear catching a protozoan disease, Toxoplasmosis, from cats. This disease can cause illness in the human, but more seriously, can cause birth defects in the unborn. Toxoplasmosis is a common disease, sometimes spread through the feces of cats. It is caused most often from eating raw or rare beef. Pregnant women and people with a depressed immune system should not touch the cat litter box. Other than that, there is no reason that these people have to avoid cats.
The ancestor of all domestic cats is the African Wild Cat which still exists today.
In ancient Egypt, killing a cat was a crime punishable by death.
In ancient Egypt, mummies were made of cats, and embalmed mice were placed with them in their tombs. In one ancient city, over 300,000 cat mummies were found.
In the Middle Ages, during the Festival of Saint John, cats were burned alive in town squares.
The first cat show was in 1871 at the Crystal Palace in London.
Today there are about 100 distinct breeds of the domestic cat.
Like birds, cats have a homing ability that uses its biological clock, the angle of the sun, and the Earth's magnetic field. A cat taken far from its home can return to it. But if a cat's owners move far from its home, the cat can't find them.
Cats bury their feces to cover their trails from predators.
Cats sleep 16 to 18 hours per day. When cats are asleep, they are still alert to incoming stimuli. If you poke the tail of a sleeping cat, it will respond accordingly.
Besides smelling with their nose, cats can smell with an additional organ called the Jacobson's organ, located in the upper surface of the mouth.
The chlorine in fresh tap water irritates sensitive parts of the cat's nose. Let tap water sit for 24 hours before giving it to a cat.
Abraham Lincoln loved cats. He had four of them while he lived in the White House.
Julius Ceasar, Henri II, Charles XI, and Napoleon were all afraid of cats.
Cats have an average of 24 whiskers, arranged in four horizontal rows on each side.
The word "cat" in various languages: French: chat; German: katze; Italian: gatto; Spanish/Portugese: gato; Yiddish: kats; Maltese: qattus; Swedish/Norwegian: katt; Dutch: kat; Icelandic: kottur; Greek: catta; Hindu: katas; Japanese:neko; Polish: kot; Ukranian: kotuk; Hawiian: popoki; Russian: koshka; Latin: cattus; Egyptian: mau; Turkish: kedi; Armenian: Gatz; Chinese: mio; Arabic: biss; Indonesian: qitta; Bulgarian: kotka; Malay: kucing; Thai/Vietnamese: meo; Romanian: pisica; Lithuanian: katinas; Czech: kocka; Slovak: macka; Armenian: gatz; Basque: catua; Estonian: kass; Finnish: kissa; Swahili: paka.
Statistics indicate that animal lovers in recent years have shown a preference for cats over dogs!
Cats can be taught to walk on a leash, but a lot of time and patience is required to teach them. The younger the cat is, the easier it will be for them to learn.
Purring not always means happiness. Purring could mean a cat is in terrible pain such as during childbirth. Kitten will purr to their mother to let her know they are getting enough milk while nursing. Purring is a process of inhaling and exhaling, usually performed while the mouth is closed. But don't worry, if your cat is purring while your gently petting her and holding her close to you - that is a happy cat!
The catnip plant contains an oil called hepetalactone which does for cats what marijuana does to some people. Not all cats react to it those that do appear to enter a trancelike state. A positive reaction takes the form of the cat sniffing the catnip, then licking, biting, chewing it, rub & rolling on it repeatedly, purring, meowing & even leaping in the air.
Of all the species of cats, the domestic cat is the only species able to hold its tail vertically while walking. All species of wild cats hold their talk horizontally or tucked between their legs while walking.
A happy cat holds her tail high and steady.
Almost 10% of a cat's bones are in its tail, and the tail is used to maintain balance.
Cat families usually play best in even numbers. Cats and kittens should be aquired in pairs whenever possible.
Baking chocolate is the most dangerous chocolate to your cat.
You check your cats pulse on the inside of the back thigh, where the leg joins to the body. Normal for cats: 110-170 beats per minute.
Jaguars are the only big cats that don't roar.
A cats field of vision is about 185 degrees.
Cats have individual preferences for scratching surfaces and angles. Some are horizontal scratchers while others exercise their claws vertically.
The Maine Coone is the only native American long haired breed.
The Maine Coon is 4 to 5 times larger than the Singapura, the smallest breed of cat.
Tabby cats are thought to get their name from Attab, a district in Baghdad, now the capital of Iraq.
Retractable claws are a physical phenomenon that sets cats apart from the rest of the animal kingdom. I n the cat family, only cheetahs cannot retract their claws.
Not every cat gets "high" from catnip. Whether or not a cat responds to it depends upon a recessive gene: no gene, no joy.
A cat can sprint at about thirty-one miles per hour.
In ancient Egypt, when a family cat died, all family members would shave their eyebrows as a sign of mourning.
Cats have been domesticated for half as long as dogs have been.
A cat's whiskers are thought to be a kind of radar, which helps a cat gauge the space it intends to walk through.
A cat can spend five or more hours a day grooming himself.
All cats have three sets of long hairs that are sensitive to pressure - whiskers, eyebrows,and the hairs between their paw pads.
Both humans and cats have identical regions in the brain responsible for emotion.
A cat's brain is more similar to a man's brain than that of a dog.
A cat has more bones than a human; humans have 206, and the cat - 230.
Cats have 30 vertebrae--5 more than humans have.
The cat has 500 skeletal muscles (humans have 650).
Cats have 32 muscles that control the outer ear (compared to human's 6 muscles each). A cat can rotate its ears independently 180 degrees, and can turn in the direction of sound 10 times faster than those of the best watchdog.
Cats' hearing stops at 65 khz (kilohertz); humans' hearing stops at 20 khz.
In relation to their body size, cats have the largest eyes of any mammal.
Cats have 30 teeth (12 incisors, 10 premolars, 4 canines, and 4 molars), while dogs have 42. Kittens have baby teeth, which are replaced by permanent teeth around the age of 7 months.
When a cat drinks, its tongue - which has tiny barbs on it - scoops the liquid up backwards.
Cats purr at the same frequency as an idling diesel engine, about 26 cycles per second.
Cats step with both left legs, then both right legs when they walk or run.
Cats walk on their toes.
Cats take between 20-40 breaths per minute.
Normal body temperature for a cat is 102 degrees F.
Cats respond most readily to names that end in an "ee" sound.
A cat will tremble or shiver when it is extreme pain.
When a domestic cat goes after mice, about 1 pounce in 3 results in a catch.
Declawing a cat is the same as cutting a human's fingers off at the knuckle. There are several alternatives to a complete declawing, including trimming or a less radical (though more involved) surgery to remove the claws. Preferably, try to train your cat to use a scratching post.
Cats with long, lean bodies are more likely to be outgoing, and more protective and vocal than those with a stocky build.
A steady diet of dog food may cause blindness in your cat - it lacks taurine.
It has been scientifically proven that stroking a cat can lower one's blood pressure.
If your cat snores, or rolls over on his back to expose his belly, it means he trusts you.
Cats respond better to women than to men, probably due to the fact that women's voices have a higher pitch.
Florence Nightingale owned more than 60 cats in her lifetime.
When your cats rubs up against you, she is actually marking you as "hers" with her scent. If your cat pushes his face against your head, it is a sign of acceptance and affection.
Tests done by the Behavioral Department of the Musuem of Natural History conclude that while a dog's memory lasts about 5 minutes, a cat's recall can last as long as 16 hours.
Has your cat ever brought its prey to your door? Cats do that because they regard their owners as their "kittens." The cats are teaching their "kittens" how to hunt by bringing them food. Most people aren't too delighted when a pet brings in their kill. Instead of punishing your cat, praise it for its efforts, accept the prey, and then secretly throw it away.
Cats can predict earthquakes. We humans are not 100% sure how they do it. There are several different theories.
A queen (female cat) can begin mating when she is between 5 and 9 months old.
A tomcat (male cat) can begin mating when he is between 7 and 10 months old.
Tomcats can mate at anytime, while quenns can only mate during a period of time called heat or estrus.
Heat occurs several times a year and can last anywhere from 3 to 15 days.
At 4 weeks, it is important to play with kittens so that they do not develope a fear of people.
Kittens remain with their mother till the age of 9 weeks.
It is estimated that cats can make over 60 different sounds.
The cat's footpads absorb the shocks of the landing when the cat jumps.
Ailurophile - that's what we're officially called. It's what cat lovers are known as.
Cats, just like people, are subject to asthma. Dust, smoke, and other forms of air pullution in your cat's environment can be troublesome sources of irritation.
Since cats are so good at hiding illness, even a single instance of a symptom should be taken very seriously.
There is a species of cat smaller than the average housecat. It is native to Africa and it is the Black-footed cat (Felis nigripes). Its top weight is 5.5 pounds.
A tortoiseshell is black with red or orange markings and a calico is white with patches of red, orange and black.
The Ancient Egyptian word for cat was mau, which means "to see".
Cats spend 70% of their day sleeping which means a cat that is 9 years old has been awake for only 3 years of its life. When awake, a cat will spend more than 30% of its time grooming
Cats do not have a sweet tooth like humans due to a mutation in their taste receptors. They only have 473 taste-buds, compares to humans 9,000 taste-buds
When a group of cats get together they are called a “clowder”
When comparing a cat and dog brain, a cat brain is biologically more similar to a human brain. This is because cats have the same regions in their brains that are responsible for emotions
In 1963, French cat “Felicette” was the first cat to ever travel into outer space
Cats use their whiskers to find out if a space is too small to squeeze into. They also have no collar bone which means they can fit into any space that is the size of their head
The oldest cat recorded was a cat from England who died in 1939. Her name was “Puss” and she was 36 years old
Have you ever noticed a cat’s tail quivering when it is near you? This is an expression of love
When cats are happy they knead with their paws
A cat will fall in a special order. First it’s head will rotate, the spine will twist and the back legs will align. The cat will then arch its back to reduce the impact of the landing. This is why they can fall from great heights and not get hurt
Cats can sense the tone in your voice. They will know when you are speaking lovingly to them or if you are yelling at them. But, they do not understand punishment like humans do – that is why you will find your cat does not care if they get into trouble. (and I just thought they were ignorant!)
Cats have amazing vision! They can see anything up to 120 feet away and their peripheral vision is roughly 285 degrees. They also have exceptional night vision as they only need 1/6th amount of light that humans need.
Cats do not have sweat glands over their body like humans do. They sweat through their paws. Also, Cats have 5 toes on both their front paws but only 4 toes on their back paws.
A cat purrs 26 times every second. This is equivalent to an idle diesel engine.
A cat’s hearing ability is unique. They can hear ultrasonic sounds! How well does this work? Rodents use the same ultrasonic sounds to communicate which your cat can hear! But your dog and humans can’t.
It has been scientifically proven that owning cats is good for our health and can decrease the occurrence of high blood pressure and other illnesses.
Stroking a cat can help to relieve stress, and the feel of a purring cat on your lap conveys a strong sense of security and comfort.
The ancient Egyptians were the first civilisation to realise the cat's potential as a vermin hunter and tamed cats to protect the corn supplies on which their lives depended.
Sir Isaac Newton is not only credited with the laws of gravity but is also credited with inventing the cat flap.
A cat has more bones than a human being; humans have 206 and the cat has 230 bones.
A cat's hearing is much more sensitive than humans and dogs.
The cat's tail is used to maintain balance.
Cats see six times better in the dark and at night than humans.
Cats eat grass to aid their digestion and to help them get rid of any fur in their stomachs.
A healthy cat has a temperature between 38 and 39 degrees Celcius.
Cats have the largest eyes of any mammal.
The female cat reaches sexual maturity at around 6 to 10 months and the male cat between 9 and 12 months.
A female cat will be pregnant for approximately 9 weeks or between 62 and 65 days from conception to delivery.
The average litter of kittens is between 2 - 6 kittens.
Ailurophile is the word cat lovers are officially called.
Purring does not always indicate that a cat is happy. Cats will also purr loudly when they are distressed or in pain.
All cats need taurine in their diet to avoid blindness. Cats must also have fat in their diet as they are unable to produce it on their own.
In households in the UK and USA, there are more cats kept as pets than dogs. At least 35% of households with cats have 2 or more cats.
When a cats rubs up against you, the cat is marking you with it's scent claiming ownership.
About 37% of American homes today have at least 1 cat.
Milk can give some cats diarrhea.
The average lifespan of an outdoor-only cat is about 3 to 5 years while an indoor-only cat can live 16 years or much longer.
On average, a cat will sleep for 16 hours a day.
A domestic cat can run at speeds of 30 mph.
The life expectancy of cats has nearly doubled over the last fifty years.
Blue-eyed, white cats are often prone to deafness.
The cat's front paw has 5 toes and the back paws have 4. Cats born with 6 or 7 front toes and extra back toes are called polydactl.
An adult cat has 30 teeth, 16 on the top and 14 on the bottom.
There are approximately 60,000 hairs per square inch on the back of a cat and about 120,000 per square inch on its underside.
Cats and kittens should be acquired in pairs whenever possible as cat families interact best in pairs.
In multi-cat households, cats of the opposite sex usually get along better.
The first official cat show in the UK was organised at Crystal Palace in 1871.
Cats are born with blue eyes. They change at approximately 12 weeks of age.
Sometimes your cat will find it difficult to find the treats you throw him on the floor. The reason is because cats can't see directly under their own nose.
Cats can jump between 5 & 7 times as high as their tail.
Ailurophobia: the hate or fear of cats
80% of all cats, big and small, have the same reaction to catnip, due to their feline genes. Cats that are younger than 6 months and tigers however, do not react to catnip.
A cat uses it's whiskers to tell if the space they are contemplating entering is big enough for them.
Cats not only walk on their toes but they have 5 toes on their front paws and 4 toes on the their back paws.
Killing a cat was punishable by death in acient Egypt.
Just like fingerprints on humans, the nose pad of cats is rigid in a pattern that is completely unique.
Sir Isaac Newton is credited for inventing the cat door.
Start a garden inside your home. Cats love to eat grass, parsley, catnip, and sage. However, consult your Vet before planting a garden for your cat to eat. Many plants are harmful or even fatal to cats.
Pet owners live longer, happier lives with less stress and less heart attacks.
Cats prefer their food at room temperature.
Don't put your cat's collar on too tight. Make sure you can slip 2 fingers between the collar and the cat.
Cats are born with blue eyes. They change at approximately 12 weeks of age.
Sometimes your cat will find it difficult to find the treats you throw him on the floor. The reason is because cats can't see directly under their own nose.
Cats can jump between 5 & 7 times as high as their tail.
Ailurophobia: the hate or fear of cats
80% of all cats, big and small, have the same reaction to catnip, due to their feline genes. Cats that are younger than 6 months and tigers however, do not react to catnip.
A cat uses it's whiskers to tell if the space they are contemplating entering is big enough for them.
Cats not only walk on their toes but they have 5 toes on their front paws and 4 toes on the their back paws.
Killing a cat was punishable by death in acient Egypt.
Just like fingerprints on humans, the nose pad of cats is rigid in a pattern that is completely unique.
Sir Isaac Newton is credited for inventing the cat door.
Start a garden inside your home. Cats love to eat grass, parsley, catnip, and sage. However, consult your Vet before planting a garden for your cat to eat. Many plants are harmful or even fatal to cats.
Pet owners live longer, happier lives with less stress and less heart attacks.
Cats prefer their food at room temperature.
Don't put your cat's collar on too tight. Make sure you can slip 2 fingers between the collar and the cat.
There are such diseases as feline leukemia and feline AIDS.
Cats are not immune to cancer.
A cat's brain is actually more like a human brain rather than a dog's brain.
Cat's sleep between 16 and 18 hours a day, but not soundly. They will react immediatly too any stimulation.
Chocolate and Tylenol are both harmful to cats.
Cats are sensitive to lactose so milk is not good for them. In fact, it will give them diarrhea. Instead, give your cat cream. The butterfat is easier for them to handle and it's good for them. It also has less lactose.
You can extend your cat's life by having them neutered.
An indoor cat will live on average to be about 15 years old. An outdoor cat generally does not live past 5 years old.
A cat can pivot its ears 180 degrees.
Never leave your cat in a car alone. Temperatures, even with the windows cracked, are too much for your pet to handle.
A female cat can start mating at 5 months old. A male cat must wait until he is at least 7 months old.
Pregnancy in cat's usually last between 58 and 65 days, about 2 months.
In order to cover their trails from predators, cats bury their feces.
A cat who rolls over and exposes its stomach to you, feel very safe and secure around you. They are also letting you know that they enjoy your company.
Cats kead their paws when they are happy.
Your cat will pick on your mood and will change their mood based on yours.
If your cat likes to climb the Christmas tree, hang a lemon or orange scented air freshner on the bark. They don't care for those smells and will leave the tree alone.
Cats speak to humans who speak to them. They also get their security from your voice, so watch your tone.
Cats rub up against objects and people in an attempt to put their scent on them, i.e. "mark them"
Cats purr when they are feeling any strong emotions.
30% of a cat's waking hours are spent on grooming.
Your cat prefers eating out of a clean bowl in the same quiet spot everyday.
Cat's bite out of pleasure as well, so when your done petting your cat, if he/she bites you, it may not be a negative response.
The fattest cat weighed approximately 46 lbs.
The smallest cat weighed just under 2 lbs.
The oldest cat lived 36 years
The most fertile cat gave birth to 420 kittens
The largest litter was 19 kittens (4 of them were unfortunately stillborn)
The largest feline The Jaipur is the largest feline on record at 932 lbs. He is a Siberian tiger living in New Jersey.
The fastest land animal is the cheetah
The first cat show was held in London was at the Crystal Place in 1871.
The first cat show held in America was at Madison Square Garden in 1895.
The Egyptian name for cat was Mau. This also means "to see."
The classical Greek word for cat is ailouros.
Cats are said to have a sense of smell that is 30 times better than humans.
Cats enjoy the smell, and the effects, of catnip, but only if they've inherited the gene for it. For other cats, the smell may be intriguing, but catnip will have no effect.
Cats are born with their sense of smell functioning, and it is highly developed by about three weeks of age.
Their sense of smell means that felines can be sensitive to tainted food, and perhaps this has contributed to their finicky reputation.
The night vision of the feline is legendary. In order to see, they need only one-sixth as much light as a human. They cannot, however, see in total darkness. When enough light is not available, they use their whiskers to feel their way around.
Your kitty's eyes offer her almost 285 degrees of sight in three dimensions. Ideal peripheral vision for hunting.
Cats do see in color, and can distinguish yellow, blue, and green hues. Their eyes are best, however, at detecting movement, and shades of gray.
The feline eye has a third eyelid. Called the nictating membrane, or haw, it is designed to remove dust and dirt, and lubricate the eye. If there is illness or injury, the haw will show. Ironically, content and sleepy cats have been known to show haws as well.
With males weighing in at 15 to 20 pounds, the Ragdoll cat breed is the largest of all domestic cats.
Althought the Ragdoll is said to be the largest domestic cat breed, the largest cat on record is actually a member of another breed - the Maine Coon.
The breed to take "Best Cat" in the first cat show ever held in the US was a Maine Coon cat.
If historians are correct, and cats were first domesticated in Egypt, then the Egyptian Mau might be the oldest cat breed.
The tuxedo cat breed is not really a breed at all.
The calico cat breed is also not really a breed either, but a coat color. Because the genes responsible for certain colors in the coat are sex related, calicos are almost always female. Male calicos do exist, contrary to what some believe, but are often sterile.
The Norwegian Forest cat is a natural breed that is said to have accompanied Vikings on their long journeys at sea. If this is true, then they are (or descended from) one of the oldest breeds.
The Maine coon may share some ancestry with Norwegian Forest cats. If Vikings landed in North America, then it just may be that they brought the Norwegian Forest cats and left a few behind.
According to Americanhumane.org, the Persian cat has been the most popular breed in the United States since 1871.
Siamese cats have two large dark smudge marks on their backs. These are called "temple marks" and legend has it that they got there when a holy being picked up a Siamese and left the impression of his hands there forever.
Some sources have claimed that at one time, the Siamese cat was the number one breed in the US. Perhaps these statements have been made by meezer lovers.
Maine coon lovers have also claimed supremacy in the battle for most popular cat breed.
Larger cats are sometimes the least aggressive. The Main coon cat is referred to as a "gentle giant." Persians are said to be the most gentle of all breeds, but the Ragdoll (another large breed) may take that honor as it has an aversion to conflict. Ragdolls often play fight with claws retracted.
The Balinese cat breed is a natural long haired mutation of the Siamese cat.
Both the Balinese and Siamese are among the most intelligent of the domestic cat breeds.
There are both "traditional" and "modern" versions of a number of breeds, including the Balinese and Siamese. The traditional versions have different characteristics from the modern versions, such as coat length, and the size and shape of the body, head, and ears.
Cats tend to have short jaws, giving their bite lots of power. To kill prey, a bite into the neck with the canine teeth will do it. The cat will hold on until the animal suffocates.
Cats have thick hair around the pads of their feet, which allows them to remain silent while walking.
Unlike many animals, felines walk on their toes, enabling them to start into a run at any moment.
With a large kill, cats in the wild use their rough tongues to separate meat from bone.
Cats will often eat the entire body of small prey, crushing and ingesting bones for calcium, along with any vegetation the prey has consumed.
Cat species are found throughout the world.
Cats are good climbers and climb high into trees quickly. They get stuck in trees because their backward pointing claws don't help them to go down, only up.
All cats have a territory, including indoor cats. If you notice your cat pacing the house, she's probably on patrol.
When your cat rubs against you, she is actually marking you with her scent. Cats that live together will exchange scents with each other regularly, forming a communal scent. If one of your cats comes back from the veterinarian smelling funky, this can cause unrest in the house, and even some hissing. Starting with the cat that was not at the vet, rub everybody with the same cloth several times to spread the scent around.
Cats spend up to a third of their waking hours grooming themselves.
A cat can reach almost every part of its body with its barbed tongue.
Cats groom more actively (and sometimes over-groom) when they are anxious. It tends to help them relieve tension. They also groom to cool off in hot weather and after activity.
Cats love to sun bathe, and sunlight on the fur produces vitamin D. During grooming the fur provides vitamin D nourishment.
During self-grooming, scratching with the back legs helps to dislodge any parasites from the fur and skin. It also helps to get the difficult to clean areas of the head, neck, and shoulders.
Adult cat tongues have rows of hooked, backward-pointing projections called papillae. These barbs latch onto food and fluids, and give the cat's tongue a sandpaper feel. Newborn kittens only have papillae around the edge of the tongue.
Cats drink fluids by curling their tongues into the shape of a spoon. The barbs on their tongues help scoop the water as they flick it to the backs of their mouths, swallowing every few laps.
Your cat can hear more than one sound at a time, and can independently rotate each ear 180 degrees, thanks to more than 20 muscles on each side.
People can hear up to 20,000 cycles per second, but cats can hear up to 65,000 cycles. The sound of mice chatter is about 40,000 cycles per second. So the next time your cat perks her ears up and you don't hear anything... well, you figure it out!
Cats don't have to have direct contact in order to actually feel. Cats can judge distances between objects, the width of an opening, and changes in temperature and air pressure. Beneath your cat's skin are sensors that can detect heat and cold, drafts, and slight changes in pressure.
Cats are heat seekers, which explains why they're avid sunbathers. Cats are drawn to heat so much that they've been known to burn their fur before turning away from a heat source.
The noseleather and the paw pads are the most sensitive areas on the cat to the touch. Cats can judge a rise or fall in temperature as minimal as one or two degrees.
Whiskers act like antennae. They help judge distance, and changes in air pressure.
When it's too dark to see well, whiskers are used to navigate. They can be used to judge the size of openings. First the whiskers, then the head. Since the feline collarbone is loose, a cat can crawl through a space the width of its head.
If a cat gets oil or excessive amounts of dirt on its fur, a so called bran bath may be used to remove the dirt and oil from the fur.
Domestic cats are said to be descended from the African wild cat. These cats are hard to distinguish from the domestic tabby, and weight about 9 to 11 lbs.
A hybrid cat is actually a domestic cat crossed with a wild cat. There are various hybrid cat breeds, each of which involves different crosses. A common example is the Bengal cat, which is a domestic crossed with an Asian leopard cat.
According to the Cat Fancier's Association, less than 1% of all domestic cats in the world are pedigreed cats. So, your cat may resemble a particular breed, but if you haven't got the papers to prove it, who knows?!
If you plan to show your cat, then you'll not only need papers for the pedigree, but also certificates of vaccination in order to participate.
Cat fleas will sometimes jump from cats to humans, but they prefer cats. If possible, stick to non-toxic and natural flea killer.
Polydactyl, or "many-toed" cats, have more than the usual number of toes. The polydactyl gene is dominant, and therefore shows if it is present.
The polydactyl feature is common in the Maine Coon cat. Selective breeding has reduced or eliminated this trait from some of the gene pools of certain pedigreed cat lines. There are some people who would like to preserve it, however, such as certain Maine Coon Poly enthusiasts.
The tooth fairy visits your cat at about 5 months old.
House cats often eat grass. Grass adds folic acid to your cat's diet, and may also act as roughage and help her to bring up fur balls.
Average adult female domestic cats need to consume about 200 to 250 calories per day, and males about 250 to 300.
The National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences estimates that obesity will occur in 25 percent of dogs and cats. My cat Teddie was overweight, but increasing her activity level with regular play sessions worked to bring her weight back in line... better than kitty cat Weight Watchers I'm sure.
Adult cats have 30 teeth.
Cat food creators have tried to make the most premium of premium cat foods. This "mouse flavored" cat food has so far failed all taste tests. Either you can't fool mother nature, or the testers are too finicky.
Cats use their powerful sense of smell to determine the identity of other living things, and to determine who has been in an area before.
Cats will deposit scent markings in order to define territory, and help them feel more secure.
Scratching on trees and other objects is a way of sharpening the claws, but it also serves to deposit a marking scent via the scent glands between the toes.
Domestic cats will spray inside the house if they feel threatened. Insecure cats will spread their scent around this way in order to feel more secure and in command.
Your cat may feel threatened, and compelled to spray, if strange scents are brought into the house on shoes, clothing, or personal items, or if a cat outside is badgering them.
Do not punish your cat for spraying, as this will make her feel more insecure. Instead, try determining the source of the problem and coming up with a solution.
Feliway is a synthetic version (no, it's not extracted or made from cats) of the domestic cat cheek pheromone. Spraying it around the house may relieve tension and make cats feel less aggressive as it simulates the result of cheek rubbing.
There are over 30 species of the mammal known as the cat - 37 to be exact, of which, the Domestic Cat, or House Cat, is one.
As are all 37 species of cat, it is a member of the Family Felidae, Order Carnivora.
The Egyptian Mau, domesticated thousands of years ago,
is the only domestic cat breed recommended by the International Society for Endangered Cats (ISEC).
Cats use their tails not only to express emotion, but also to balance themselves.
Cats can get sunburned (they also can get freckles). Light colored (especially white) cats are particularly susceptible to sunburn. Anywhere there is less hair to protect the animal, especially the tips of the ears, the nose, and the area just above the eyes, is at risk.
Cat urine glows under a black light! But so do many other body fluids from other animals, including human and dog urine. Don't be so quick to blame the cat!
The longest cat whisker on record as of February 15, 2004, measured 16.5 cm (6.5 in).
Ironically, the cat that it belongs to, a brown/black Maine Coon named Ellie, had no whiskers when her owners first adopted her from a shelter in 1997. She was only a few months old and very weak at the time.
It's interesting that the longest domestic cat is also a Maine Coon. Measuring 121.9 cm (48 in) from nose to tail, Leo weighs 15.8 kg (35 lb), and has paws so big they can fit into a size 2 child's shoe!
Cats stalk, hunt, and catch prey (or anything else, even each other, or you!) instinctively. But... associating hunting, killing, and food is a learned behavior. Young cats are typically taught to kill and eat their prey by their mothers.
Some long haired cats prefer to eliminate on a smooth surface, such as the bottom of the litter box, rather than on the litter itself. Typically, they'll move all the litter to one side of the box to expose the bottom, and then cover things up when they are done.
When outdoors, some cats will use a sandbox as a litter box. So be careful out there!
Poinsettia is commonly thought to be a poisonous plant for cats. It is not, however, on the toxic plant list put out by the ASPCA.
Other names for the catnip herb are catmint, catswort, and field balm.
Catnip has been shown in studies to not only repel, but also kill termites!
Catnip as a mosquito repellent? Researchers have determined that nepetalactone is 10 times more effective at repelling mosquitos than DEET - the chemical insect repellent. So, a new slogan may be... "nothing repels mosquitos better than catnip oil!"
Nepetalactone is the name of the essential oil in catnip that gives it its aromatic odor. It's also the stuff that drives cats crazy!
More than 30 percent of homes in the United States have cats.
According to the Virginia Beach (VA, USA) SPCA, a study published in the New England Journal of Medicine showed that there is no correlation between cat ownership and toxoplasmosis infection.
The primary means by which humans contract toxoplasmosis is NOT contact with cats or cat feces - it is by eating raw or undercooked meat. This is exemplified by the extremely high rate of infection in France. Toxoplasmosis also may be contracted through contact with contaminated soil, although this is more likely in developing countries.
Guinness World Records no longer accepts entries for "heaviest cat." This, and other records have been eliminated due to ethical issues. It seems that people were feeding their animals unhealthy amounts of food in order to beat the record.
All kittens are born with blue eyes and don't develop their true eye color that they will have as adults until they're about 3 months old.
All kittens are born with their eyes closed and don't open them until they are between 6 and 12 days old, with some Siamese cats having been known to open them in only 2 days. They can't actually see until about 2 or 3 days after they open their eyes.
At about 10 weeks of age, a kitten's sense of sight is fully developed.
Kittens use their paws to rhythmically tread and put pressure on the mother's belly. This kneading action massages the mother cat's breasts and stimulates the release of milk.
Adult cats repeat this kneading action, often when they are purring and seem content. We don't know why adult cats do this for certain. Perhaps there is some residual memory of kittenhood, or maybe it's just a built-in physical response.
Newborn kittens have no way of regulating their own body temperature. Blind and deaf, they follow their sense of smell (and possibly vibrating purrs) to reach their mother to suckle. They rely on momma cat and piling on top of each other to stay warm. When they're too warm, they spread out to cool off.
When they are about 3 weeks old, kittens begin grooming each other and their mother. Among friendly cats, this mutual grooming behavior carries into adulthood.
Although they may number up to 15, the average litter of domestic cats is 4.
Siamese cats often have large litter sizes (above 4).
A mother cat will ordinarily begin to wean kittens by refusing them milk somewhere between 6 and 8 weeks of age.
"Morris" is a finicky cat. To prevent kittens from becoming finicky adults, offer a wide variety of foods at a young age.
Once a kitten starts eating solid food (about 6 weeks of age), you can start wiping different types of foods on their lips so they'll lick it off. Continue offering a varied meal plan as they age.
To get kittens adjusted to specific feeding times, give them 10 to 15 minutes to consume their food, then take it away.
Cats enjoy four toes at the rear paws while five toes at the front paws.
Baby cats are known as ‘kittens’ and they often do not open their eyes until 9 days from their birth. The initial color of baby’s eyes is blue and varies as it reaches few months old.
Majority of cats do not have eyelashes.
Every cat is unable to witness things right beneath his nose and due to which little crumbs usually gets away with the eyes of these animals.
There are quite a few white cats with blue eyes that are unable to hear while those having orange eyes can hear.
Cats have this capacity to bounce far above the ground at 7 times their own height.
As you generally observe cats leaping very high and landing easily on the ground, this is mainly due to the power of their footpads taking in all the jolts that may arise as a result of dive.
A female cat gets heavy with child within 2 months.
Surprisingly, most of the cats not getting any younger are prone to have cancer.
Unlike humans, cats have a need of fat which they fulfill solely through their food intake.
Chocolate may be sweet and mouthwatering for humans, but not for cats. It is highly toxic for them.
Normally each cat gobbles around 5 mice or corresponding amount of food.
Like humans, cats also possess blood groups AB.
You may have come across few persons who are really hypersensitive to cats. That’s because these persons are actually sensitive to their spit or saliva which can be easily avoided if cats have bath on a regular basis.
A veterinarian must wipe cats’ teeth at least one time on annual basis because they cause to undergo dental problems if not spruced up properly.
African Wild Cat is the grandparent of all these cats.
You know there was a time in ancient Egypt when if you slay a cat, it was considered such a big offense that they would give you a death penalty.
In the course of Festival of Saint John (Middle Ages), people used to burn up several cats while they were breathing in Town Squares.
Cats have very strange abilities and sometimes you feel that if you leave a cat somewhere far off your residence, even then he shows up. That’s because the nature has bestowed these little creatures with a wonderful bionetwork clock. With the help of this clock, magnetic field of the Earth and the precise face of the sun, cats are able to track down their dwelling or destination where they came from. However if you leave your home then it’s not possible for a cat to locate you. Isn’t it one of the amazing cat facts for kids?
Typically cats nod off for about 18 hours every day but they are not inattentive while asleep.
Since a tap water contains chlorine so it hurts various delicate sections of the cat. Therefore it’s best to let the tap water down for about 1 day and then allow him to sip.
Abraham Lincoln, the American President domesticated 4 cats in the White House because he stuck on them. One of the funniest cat facts for kids is that even though Napoleon, Julius Ceasar and Charles XI were quite courageous but scared of these little creatures.
Another one of the amazing cat facts for kids is that domestic cats are the only species among the entire class that keep their tails in an upright posture during strolling whereas the rest always keeps their tails straight. Likewise, if a cat is keeping its tail fixed in an upright position, it means he is in high spirits. This tail is very essential for a cat to keep himself in equilibrium. That’s why around 10 percent of bones are present in it.
Unlike humans, you can feel the pulse of a cat by touching the inner part of their back leg thigh and 150 beats/min are considered natural.
All the cats growl except Jaguars.
Likewise, all cats can fold its claws except Cheetahs.
Cats can run at a speed of almost 50 km/h.
One of the astonishing cat facts for kids is that in ancient Egypt where there was a lot of respect for cats at the time, as a cat departs, each member of the family circle use to trim his/her eyebrows for the sake of grief.
The whiskers of a cat are extremely useful for him to navigating and locating the area around him (just like our radar system).
A cat strolls on his toes.
In every minute, a cat takes almost 30 to 40 breaths.
A cat answers back at once from the terms that ends with ‘ee’ voice.
When you observe a cat is quivering, it means he is in excruciating pain.